All right, Steve.
I am dying here.
Okay.
What you think about all this AI's.
So as I said at the top of the podcast
and I will reiterate security now
will not be evolving into AI today.
No, we have shows for that.
That's false.
And that said aside from the fact
that the recent truly astonishing advances in AI
are going to directly impact everyone's lives
outside of the security sphere.
I'm also very certain that we're going to be seeing
AI's impact upon the security
of our software and operating systems.
And we may not be needing to wait long.
So over the course of the next few years,
I'm sure that the topic of AI will be reemerging.
And I'm not saying,
I'm not saying I'm never going to talk about it again
because it'll just be fun to talk about
the major advances that I expect that we're going to be seeing.
One, actually, I'll be talking about in a second
only about a month away.
So our listeners have been following my journey
through this topic, you know,
and it's not been a straight line.
You know, more than anything else,
I endeavor to be an honest researcher
an honest researcher will readily revise
their entire belief system as required
when presented with new facts and information.
You know, clutching to obsolete dogma
simply because it's familiar and comfortable
is not the way of science.
And it was because I was puzzled and confused
by what I was experiencing firsthand
that I went searching for that information.
I believe I found it.
I believe I understand it,
at least as much as it's possible
without actually implementing it myself
and I've got other work to do.
So that's not going to happen.
And I've been changed by what I learned.
Three weeks ago, as I said,
I might have something to say about this
before we met again today.
And that, and I said, if so,
I would probably enjoy sharing that with this audience
with a special email over the holidays.
Now, the possibility of that happening
induced more than 1,100 of our listeners
who had not already signed up
to the security now mailing to do so.
So for that reason alone,
you know, due to that declaration of interest,
I felt I had to say something.
Today, I have much more to say on the topic
than I did nine days ago,
last Monday, December 30th, when I sent that out.
But let's start with what those 15,000 and 60 subscribers
received from me last week,
that I'll expand a bit on what I think
are the most important points
and what I've continued to learn since.
So, what I wrote then was,
when I first said about writing this email,
my plan was to share what I had learned
during the first half of our three week hiatus
from the podcast.
But it quickly grew long, even longer than this,
because I've learned quite a lot
during a lot about what's going on with AI.
Since I suspect no one wants to read
a podcast-linked piece of email,
which I would largely need to repeat
for the podcast anyway, which is what I'm doing now,
I'm gonna distill this into an historical narrative
to summarize a few key points and milestones.
Then I'm gonna point everyone to a 22 minute YouTube video
that should serve to raise everyone's eyebrows.
So here it is.
First, everything that's going on is about neural networks.
This has become so obvious to those in the business
that they no longer talk about it.
It would be like making a point of saying
that today's computers run on electricity.
Duh.
Okay, AI computation can be divided into pre-training
and test time, also called inference time.
Pre-training is the monumental task,
and it is monumental, of putting information
into a massive and initially untrained neural network.
Information is put into the network
by comparing the network's output
against the expected or correct output,
then back propagating tweaks to the neural networks
vast quantity of parameters
to move the network's latest output
more toward the correct output.
A modern neural network like GPT-3,
which is already obsolete,
had 175 billion parameters,
interlinking its neurons,
each of which requires tweaking.
This is done over and over and over,
many millions of times across a massive body
of knowledge, which I have in quotes,
to gradually train the network
to generate the proper output for any input.
Counterintuitive, though it may be,
the result of this training is a neural network
that actually contains the knowledge
that was used to train it.
It is a true knowledge representation.
Now, if that's difficult to swallow,
consider human DNA as an analogy.
DNA contains all of the knowledge
that's required to build a person.
The fact that DNA is not itself intelligent or sentient
doesn't mean that it's not jam-packed with knowledge.
In fact, the advances that have most recently been made,
which I'll get to in a bit,
are dramatic improvements in the technology
for extracting that stored knowledge
from the network.
That's why I titled today's podcast,
AI training and inference.
The inference is the second half.
The implementation of neural networks is surprisingly simple,
requiring only a lot of standard multiplication and addition
pipelined with massive parallelism.
This is exactly what GPUs were designed to do.
They were originally designed to perform
many simple three-decalculations needed for modern gaming.
Then they were employed to solve hash problems
to mine cryptocurrency.
But now they lie at the heart of all neural network AI.
Now, even when powered by massive arrays
of the fastest GPUs rented from cloud providers,
this pre-training approach has become prohibitively,
well, it was becoming and is prohibitively expensive
in time consuming.
But seven years ago, in 2017,
a team of eight Google AI researchers published
a truly groundbreaking paper titled Attention Is All You Need.
The title was inspired by the famous Beatles song,
Love Is All You Need,
and the paper introduced the technology
they named Transformers.
Actually, it was named that because one of the researchers
liked the sound of the word.
The best way to think of transformer technology
is that it allows massive neural networks
to be trained much more efficiently in parallel.
This insightful paper also introduced the idea
that not all of the training tokens
that were being fed into the network,
which is the long string of data being fed
into a model during one training iteration.
Not all of those tokens needed to be considered
with equal strength because they were not all equally important.
In other words, more attention could be given
to some than others.
These breakthroughs resulted in a massive overall improvement
in training speed, which in turn allowed vastly larger
networks to be created and trained in reasonable time.
Basically, that paper allowed,
it solved the problem that they were hitting five years ago,
six and seven years ago, that it just,
it training took too long.
That limited the size of the networks
so that limited the quality of the networks.
What happened was it then thanks to this breakthrough,
it became practical and possible
to train much larger neural networks,
which is what gave birth to today's LLMs,
large language models.
Now, the GPT in chat GPT stands for generative pre-trained
transformer.
Pre-trained is the training transformer is this technology.
But over time, once again,
researchers began running into new limitations.
They wanted even bigger networks
because bigger networks provided more accurate results.
But the bigger the network, the slower and more time-consuming
and thus costly was its training.
It would have been theoretically possible
to keep pushing that upward, but a better solution
was discovered, post-training computation.
Traditional training of massive LLMs was very expensive.
The breakthrough transformer tech
that made LLM scale neural networks feasible
for the first time.
Well, now that was being taken for granted.
But at least the training was a one-time investment.
After that, a query of the network could be made almost instantly
and therefore for almost no money.
But the trouble was that even with the largest practical
networks, the results could be unreliable,
known as hallucinations.
Aside from just being annoying, any neural network
that was going to hallucinate and just make stuff up
could never be relied upon to build chains of inference,
where its outputs could be used as new inputs
to explore consequences when seeking solutions
to problems.
Being able to reliably feed back a network's output
into its inputs would begin to look a lot like thinking
and thus inference for true problem solving.
Then a few years ago, researchers
began to better appreciate what could be done.
If a neural network's answer was not needed instantly,
they began exploring what could be accomplished post-training
if, when making a query, some time and computation
and thus money could be spent working
with the pre-trained network.
This is known as test time computation
and it's the key to the next level breakthrough.
By making a great many queries of the pre-trained network
and comparing multiple results, researchers
discovered that the overall reliability could
be improved so much that it would become possible
to create reliable inference chains for true problem
solving.
Using the jargon of the industry, this
is often called chains of thought,
although I've still object of giving too much credit
to imbuing these with too much human brain technology.
So inference chains would allow the problem-solving
behavior would allow for problem-solving behavior
by extracting the stored knowledge that
have been trained into these networks.
And the pre-trained model could also
be used for the correction of its own errors.
Now, I should note that the reason
asking the same question multiple times results
in multiple different answers is that researchers also
had long ago discovered with neural networks
that introducing just a bit of random noise,
which is called the temperature into neural networks,
resulted in superior performance.
And yes, if this all sounds suspiciously like Voodoo,
you're not wrong, but it works anyway.
Open AI's recently released O1 model,
which I talked about at the very end of last year,
is the first of these more expensive test-time inference
chain AI's to be made widely available.
It offers a truly astonishing improvement
over the previous chat GPT-4O models
that we were using.
Since O1 is expensive for Open AI
to offer on a per query basis, subscribers
are limited to seven full queries per day.
But the O1 mini model, which is faster and still much better,
but not as good, can be used without limit.
But wait, there's more.
The big news is that during their celebration of the holidays,
Open AI revealed that they have an O3 model
that blows away their brand new O1 model.
It's not yet available, but it's coming soon.
What is available are the results of its benchmarks,
and that's why I believe you need to make time
to watch this YouTube video.
I created a GRC shortcut with this episode number,
which is 1,07.
So GRC dot SC slash 1007,
that will bounce you to a, I think it's 22 minute YouTube video
talking about the benchmarks that have been the independent
benchmarks that have been run against this O3 model.
OK, so is it AGI?
Open AI is saying not quite, but there's
little question that they're closing in on it.
As you'll see in that video, the performance of Open AI's
latest O3 model, when pitted against independent evaluation
benchmarks designed specifically to measure
the general reasoning strength of AI's.
When confronted by problems that were absolutely never
part of the AI's training set,
demonstrate reasoning abilities superior to most humans.
You need to watch the video, GRC dot SC slash 1007.
Even if it were AGI, even if it were AGI,
and we're probably not far from that,
people are saying it is, I don't care.
But that doesn't mean it's taking over.
The AGI designation has only meant to indicate
that over a wide range of cognitive problem-solving tasks,
an AI can outperform a knowledgeable person.
Computers can already beat the best chess, go,
and poker players.
I think it's very clear that today's AI's are not far
from being superior to humans at general problem-solving.
That doesn't make them Frankenstein's monster to be feared.
It only makes AI a new and exceedingly useful tool.
Many years ago, I grabbed the domain clevermunkies.com,
just because I thought it was fun.
It occurs to me that it takes very clever monkeys,
indeed, to create something even more clever than themselves.
All the evidence I've seen indicates
that we're on the cusp of doing just that.
OK, so with that, with a little bit of editing
to improve it, that's what our listeners
received from me over the holidays.
If you take nothing else away from this discussion of AI
today, here is the one point I want to firmly
plant into everyone's mind, because this
is the sticking point that I see everywhere.
Nothing that was true about this field of research yesterday
will remain true tomorrow.
Nothing.
This entire field of AI research is the fastest moving target
I have ever experienced in my nearly 70 years of life.
There are a number of consequences to this fact.
For one, no book about AI that was written a year ago
or six months ago, or even last month will
be useful up to date about what's happening today.
Books written in the past can definitely
be useful for describing the history of AI
and as a snapshot of a point in time.
But even their predictions will prove
to have been wildly wrong.
The guys at open AI who are working on this and ought
to know believed two years ago that at least another decade,
another 10 years, would be needed to achieve what they
announced last month and are getting ready to unveil.
They thought it would take 10 years.
It took two.
One of the factors in facilitating this astonishing
speed of development is that it turned out
that much of what was needed was scale.
And a weird side effect of cloud-side computing
is that it's massively scalable.
If you can pay to rent it, you get to use it.
So investor dollars were pumped into the training
of ever more complex models, and they kept seeing
surprising improvements in performance.
Leo's original appraisal of large language models
as fancy spelling correctors was an accurate and useful
from the hip summary of open AI's chat GPT-3 model.
That's their take on it, too.
Chat GP3 produced grammatically correct language,
but it only coincidentally and occasionally produced
anything highly meaningful.
If it was left to keep talking, it would soon get lost.
And wander off course to produce grammatically correct
nonsense.
Even so, back then, highly creative people who
operate on the cutting edge, like Mac Brake Weekly's Alex
Lindsey, were using the chat GP3 model as a source
of new ideas and inspiration.
As I wrote this, I was reminded of how popular formal brainstorming
once was, where sometimes random ideas were just tossed out
without any filtering.
And that was the, you know, that was the entire point
to say something as a means of inspiring some new perspective.
So even chat GP3 was useful for the nonsense
that it sometimes produced.
But as a consequence of everything I've learned over the past three weeks
and of the events which have transpired since,
our previous podcast title, Podcast 1,005,
deal three weeks ago, the Wizard of Oz.
How quickly it ages, huh?
No longer seem, yes, no longer seems to fit.
And I'm a bit embarrassed by what I wrote,
because it no longer reflects reality.
As I said earlier, an honest researcher
may need to discard previous belief systems
when confronted with new information and facts.
Never has that been more true than it is here.
I'm needing to continuously update my own internal model.
There is an unfortunate downside emerging, however.
Unfortunately, I suppose, but inevitable.
With startling speed, AI has moved from a curio in the corner
of university and corporate R&D labs into big business.
That meant that the suits in their neckties
with their non-disclosure agreements descended upon the labs
of the once freely and fruitfully collaborating
academia-oriented researchers
and dropped the cone of silence over their ongoing work.
In the Distinguished Lecture Series at the Paul Allen School,
one of open AI's leading researchers, Gnome Brown,
gave a lecture titled,
Parables on the Power of Planning in AI from Poker to Diplomacy.
I have a YouTube link to Gnome's excellent talk
at the end of the show notes.
During his lecture, you could so clearly see
Gnome's unbridled enthusiasm and love of his subject
and also his disappointment when he was forced to stop himself short
to prevent sharing some detail of his work
that was now deemed to be proprietary and no longer his to share.
We only have Googles breakthrough transformer
and attention technology, which was the sole enabler
of the subsequent LLM revolution because seven years ago,
back in 2017, when things were still moving somewhat slowly,
Google AI researchers were freely publishing their work
as the academic curiosity that it was at the time.
They were working on improving Google's inter-language translation capabilities
and this inspiration emerged unbidden
from a chance meeting of eight Googlers
from various parts of the organization.
Would such a breakthrough be published in today's climate?
Seems unlikely.
And now, open AI is seeming less open than it once was.
We know that chat GPT-3 used a neural network
containing an astonishing 175 billion neuron interlinking parameters.
But 10 digits of accuracy each.
We know that because open AI freely told us.
But we have no similar information about any of their succeeding models.
The sizes of the various chat GPT-4 models,
not to mention O1 and O3 have become closely held secrets
as have details of their operation.
This is something that Elon's been complaining about, right?
Is why he's suing them.
He said, fortunately, a massive amount of detail,
all detail needing for recreating much of what we see today
from the corporate side had previously been shared in the public domain.
And research continues with new vigor and doubtless with new funding
within academia.
And remember that it wasn't so long ago that Apple was getting patterns
on Andy Hertzfeld's clever, step-wise, circle-drawing algorithms for bitmaps.
Very little of anything that's really useful remains secret forever.
And it seems clear that before long, we're going to have AI everywhere.
OK, now I would love to spend more time talking about the way neural networks function
in detail because there's some very cool aspects of that too.
But that's not the purpose of this podcast.
And perhaps I'll find another opportunity for that in the future.
There are absolutely already tons of videos on YouTube talking about all of this
for anyone who's interested.
And YouTube's recommendation engine appears to be quite excellent
because as soon as I started digging around in there, I got a lot of great stuff.
Yeah.
I do need to point out a specific series of astonishingly well-conceived
and produced instructional videos on this topic
from a guy named Grant Sanderson.
Oh, I've watched these.
They are really good.
This was how I got my education and stuff.
Yes.
Grant's website is three blue, one brown,
numeral three blue numeral one brown dot com.
And Grant's bio says these videos and the animation engine behind them
began as side projects as I was wrapping up my time
studying math and computer science at Stanford.
After graduating, I worked for Khan Academy producing videos,
articles, and exercises primarily focused on multivariate calculus.
Since the end of 2016, my primary focus has been on three blue one brown
and its associated projects.
In those years, I've also had the pleasure of contributing
to a number of different outlets for math exposition,
including spending a semester lecturing for an MIT course on computational
thinking, contributing in Netflix documentary about infinity,
writing for Quanta, and collaborating with many other educational YouTube
channels.
I have to say his animated visualizations are astonishing.
This is the one I found the most useful if you just
want a quick introduction if you put it out in November.
LLMs for beginners, very good, very, really well done.
And knowledgeable.
Yes.
I have a link in the show notes.
He did a series of eight, which is starts on neural networks and runs
through all of this technology.
Transformers, backpropagation, the whole breakthrough of attention
and how that operates.
Anyway, I recommend them without reservation to anyone who's interested in
understanding more of the inner workings of the comparatively,
and I love the word ancient technology of neural networks,
because this stuff's been around forever.
Now, what's interesting about this is that this old technology of
neural networks has recently been given new life
thanks solely to the scalability of cloud-based computing
and the presence of GPUs which are able to perform
massive amounts of simple computation operations.
So long as we have sufficient power, it appears
that processing power, and as we know, electrical power too,
that the world is facing, I believe, a true breakthrough.
Thanks to the scale of compute and training,
we've been able to throw at the problem.
However, what we have today works and is working,
but it is incredibly inefficient.
It works only due to the massive scale
we've managed to throw at neural network technology,
which is itself an extremely flexible,
but inefficient technology.
For example, it's possible to train a neural network
that has just a handful of neurons to perform
a simple binary adder function.
But the same thing can be done far more efficiently
with a couple of logical nand gates.
The thing that makes the handful of neurons potentially more interesting
is that the same network could be trained to perform
other simple functions. But the fundamental problem remains
that any simple function that a neural network could be trained to do
could be reduced to a far more efficient
couple of nand gates. So here's what I think
will eventually emerge someday and I have no idea
whatsoever when that might be. My hunch is
that just as with the handful of neurons that can be trained to perform
simple logic functions, we're going to eventually discover
that there is a far simpler way to solve the same
AI implementation problems much more efficiently
than we're currently solving them by throwing massive scale
of inefficient neural networks at the problem.
I have no idea what that solution might be.
But the intriguing thing here is that cognitive science researchers
now have a crude sort of brain
that does manage to store a useful amount of knowledge
and is able to use that knowledge to solve novel problems.
And I suspect before long to invent
newly true things. I mean you know to truly invent new things.
People are already beginning to ask
looking at these networks exactly
how it does this. Because
believe it or not that remains a mystery.